---
layout: post
title: "Proof check of CPC paper"
lang: english
---

### Note

With high probability, I'm missing some important statement. If you find some mistake in this post, I appreciate you for letting me know.

### Intro

[CPC with infoNCE](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.03748v2.pdf)[^1] is one of the most powerful unsupervised representation learning algorithms in the last few years.
When I read this paper carefully, I notice some minor points, so let me write here.

### Eq. 10

Appendix A.1 proves the optimal infoNCE's loss is an upper bound of negative mutual information $$- I(x_, c)$$ and $$\ln N$$, where $$N = \# \text{negative samples} + 1$$.
However, Eq. 10 in the paper does not hold always.

Let's start from Eq. 9 in the paper:

$$
\mathbb{E}_{X} \ln \left[ 1 + \frac{p(x_{t+k})}{ p(x_{t+k } \mid c_t) } (N-1) \right],
$$

where $$X$$ is a distribution over one sample and $$N-1$$ negative samples.

As know you, $$\ln$$ is a monotonically increase function, so if $$1 - \frac{p(x_{t+k})}{ p(x_{t+k } \mid c_t)} \geq 0$$, then Eq. 10 in the paper is derived. But $$\frac{p(x_{t+k})}{ p(x_{t+k } \mid c_t)}$$ is density ratio that can be bigger than $$1$$. Thus we cannot derive Eq. 10 from Eq. 9.

Fortunatelly, we can still obtain almost same bound:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}_{X} \ln \left[ 1 + \frac{p(x_{t+k})}{ p(x_{t+k } \mid c_t) } (N-1) \right]
&\geq
\mathbb{E}_{X} \ln \left[ \frac{p(x_{t+k})}{ p(x_{t+k } \mid c_t) } (N-1) \right] \\
&= - I(x_{t+k}, c_k) + \ln (N - 1).
\end{aligned}
$$

### Eq. 15

Eq. 15 states infoNCE is a lower bound of [MINE](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/belghazi18a/belghazi18a.pdf)[^2] that is also lower bound of mutual information. But infoNCE may not be a lower bound of MINE. In Definition 3.1 in the MINE's paper, MINE is defined by:

$$
\sup_{\theta \in \Theta} \mathbb{E}_{p(x, c)} [T_\theta] - \ln \mathbb{E}_{p(x), p(c)} [\exp(T_\theta)].
$$

But, in the second term of Eq. 15 in CPC paper, $$\ln$$ is between two expectations. Even if we use Jensen's inequality, the result is not equivalent to MINE.


---

### References

[^1]: Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, Oriol Vinyals. **Representation Learning with Contrastive Predictive Coding**. _arXiv_, 2019.
[^2]: Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Devon Hjelm. **Mutual Information Neural Estimation**. In _ICML_, 2019.
